---
title: Installing ghc 7.03 and the haskell platform on RHEL 5.6
author: Tim Docker
date: 2011-12-21
tags: [haskell]
---

The current haskell platform requires ghc 7.0.3. I need this to run on
some RHEL 5.6 machines. Whilst this OS update was released in Jan 2011,
it's based on old software. In particular, it's built with libc 2.5,
which was released back in 2006. It's not able to use the prebuilt
generic binary release from the [ghc downloads
page](http://haskell.org/ghc/download_ghc_7_0_3 "ghc downloads page").
It says:

> NOTE: If you have too old a version of libc, then you will get an
> error like "floating point exception" from the binaries in these
> bindists. You will need to either upgrade your libc (we're not sure
> what the minimum version required is), or use a binary package built
> for your distribution instead.

I sure don't want to upgrade libc, and to the best of my knowledge
there's no binary package built for RHEL. So, I'll need to build it
myself from source. But we need ghc to compile ghc, and to make it
worse, we need a version &gt;= 6.10, and the binaries for these won't
work with libc 2.5 either. So, our approach needs to be:

1.  Compile and install 6.10.4 using 6.8.3
2.  Compile a binary distribution of 7.0.3 using 6.10.4
3.  Install the 7.0.3 binary distribution
4.  Compile and install the haskell platform 2011.2.0.1

But wait, as it turns out, the RHEL 5.6 C compiler (gcc 4.1.2) doesn't
seem to be compatible with recent ghc builds either, giving errors like:

    rts/dist/build/RtsStartup.dyn_o: relocation R_X86_64_PC32 against `StgRun' can
    not be used when making a shared object; recompile with -fPIC

(there are some details on the [building and troubleshooting ghc
page](http://hackage.haskell.org/trac/ghc/wiki/Building/Troubleshooting))
So, you need a more recent gcc also. I could have build this from source
also, but luckily I had a working gcc 4.4.3 build already present. For
reference, I needed to download:

-   ghc-6.10.4-src.tar.bz2
-   ghc-6.8.3-x86\_64-unknown-linux.tar.bz2
-   ghc-7.0.3-src.tar.bz2
-   haskell-platform-2011.2.0.1.tar.gz

And here's the commands used:

    # General setup
    # Assumes downloaded files are in $BASE/downloads
    BASE=/tmp/ghc-dev
    GCC443DIR=/opt/gcc4.4.3/bin
    mkdir -p $BASE/install
    mkdir -p $BASE/build

    # Start with a 6.8.3 binary
    cd $BASE/build
    tar -xjf $BASE/downloads/ghc-6.8.3-x86_64-unknown-linux.tar.bz2
    export PATH=/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
    cd $BASE/build/ghc-6.8.3
    ./configure --prefix $BASE/install/ghc-6.8.3
    make install

    # Build 6.10.4 from src
    cd $BASE/build
    tar -xjf $BASE/downloads/ghc-6.10.4-src.tar.bz2 
    export PATH=$BASE/install/ghc-6.8.3/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
    cd $BASE/build/ghc-6.10.4
    ./configure --prefix $BASE/install/ghc-6.10.4
    make
    make install

    # Build 7.0.3 from src, using 6.10.4 and gcc 4.4.3
    # (gcc 4.1.2 from RHEL doesn't seem to work)
    cd $BASE/build
    tar -xjf $BASE/downloads/ghc-7.0.3-src.tar.bz2 
    export PATH=$BASE/install/ghc-6.10.4/bin:$GCC443DIR:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
    cd $BASE/build/ghc-7.0.3
    ./configure
    make
    make binary-dist
     
    # Unpack and install the 7.0.3 bin-dist
    cd /tmp
    rm -rf /tmp/ghc-7.0.3
    tar -xjf $BASE/build/ghc-7.0.3/ghc-7.0.3-x86_64-unknown-linux.tar.bz2
    cd /tmp/ghc-7.0.3
    ./configure --prefix $BASE/install/ghc-7.0.3
    make install

    # Unpack and install the haskell platform
    cd $BASE/build
    export PATH=$BASE/install/ghc-7.0.3/bin:$GCC443DIR:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin
    tar -xzf $BASE/downloads/haskell-platform-2011.2.0.1.tar.gz
    cd $BASE/build/haskell-platform-2011.2.0.1
    ./configure --prefix $BASE/install/ghc-7.0.3
    make
    make install

Be prepared to chew up some CPU cycles! Pleasingly, once I sorted out
the gcc version issue, all of the above worked without problems.
