---
title: "A new charting API"
author: Tim Docker
date: 2014-09-06
tags: [haskell]
---
One of the challenges with building a library like [Chart][1] is the
tension between ease of use and flexibility. Users want to produce
charts with a minimum of code up front, but later want to refine the
details. The chart library addresses this through the use of
"defaulted records" using [Data.Default.Class][2]. Because such
records are often nested, we rely on the somewhat intimidating
[lens][3] library to modify the default values. We end up with
code to create chart elements like this:

    sinusoid2 = plot_points_title .~ "fn(x)"
              $ plot_points_values .~ mydata
              $ plot_points_style . point_color .~ opaque red
              $ def

This is much simpler and cleaner that the corresponding code using
native record accessors, but it still has a certain amount of
syntactic overhead. 

I've added a simple state monad to the library to further clean up the
syntax. The state of the monad is the value being constructed,
allowing the use of the monadic lens operators. The above code sample
becomes:

    sinusoid2 = execEC $ do
        plot_points_title .= "fn(x)" 
        plot_points_values .= mydata
        plot_points_style . point_color .= opaque red

This may seem only a minor syntactic improvement, but it adds up over
an typical chart definition.

A few other changes further reduce the clutter in charting code:

* A new [Easy][6] module that includes helper functions and key dependencies
* Simpler "toFile" functions in the rendering backends
* Automatic sequencing of colours for successive plots

All this means that a simple plot can now be a one liner:

```
import Graphics.Rendering.Chart.Easy
import Graphics.Rendering.Chart.Backend.Cairo

mydata :: [Double,Double]
mydata = ...

main = toFile def "test.png" $ plot $ points "lines" mydata
```

But this extends naturally to more complex charts. The code
differences between the new stateful API versus the existing API can
been seen in [this example][4].

The stateful API is available in [chart v1.3][5] It is a thin layer
over the existing API - both will be continue to be available in the
future.

[1]: https://github.com/timbod7/haskell-chart
[2]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/data-default-class-0.0.1/docs/Data-Default-Class.html
[3]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/lens-1.2
[4]: https://github.com/timbod7/haskell-chart/wiki/example-2
[5]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Chart
[6]: https://hackage.haskell.org/package/Chart-1.3/docs/Graphics-Rendering-Chart-Easy.html


